<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook V4.1//EN" >
<book>
<bookinfo>
   <title>Bochs User Manual</title>
   <authorgroup>
   <author><firstname>Kevin</firstname><surname>Lawton</surname></author>
   <author><firstname>Bryce</firstname><surname>Denney</surname></author>
   <editor><firstname>Michael</firstname><surname>Calabrese</surname></editor>
   </authorgroup>
</bookinfo>

<!-- *************************************************************** -->
<chapter><title>What is Bochs?</title>
   <section><title>I don't know whant to call this section...</title>
      <para>
      Bochs is a portable x86 PC emulation software package that emulates
      enough of the x86 CPU, related AT hardware, and BIOS to run DOS,
      Windows '95, Minix 2.0, and other OS's, all on your workstation.
      </para>

      <para>
      Bochs is an open source project distributed under the GNU Lesser General
      Public License. It was originally a commercial product, but in
      March 2000 MandrakeSoft bought Bochs and committed it to Open Source.
      Here is the press release.
      </para>

      <para>
      Bochs now compiles/runs on many platforms. See the following list for
      supported platforms and special notes:
      </para>

      <table><title>Supported platforms</title>
         <tgroup cols=2 align=left colsep=1 rowsep=1>
         <tbody>
         <row>
            <entry>Unix/X11</entry><entry>This is my main development platform.</entry>
         </row>
         <row>
            <entry>BeOS</entry><entry>I also did this port, originally to R3/PPC using CodeWarrior.
            It now works on R4/x86 with egcs. Simon Huet picked up
            maintaining/reworking the BeOS GUI port. Check out Simon's BeBochs page.
            </entry>
         </row>

         <row>
            <entry>Win32</entry><entry> This port was done by David Ross. I've enhanced the build process
            for Win32. You can compile with either the MS Visual C++ 5.0
            or GNU-Win32 environments. Go to Compiling Bochs on Win32 </entry>
         </row>

         <row>
            <entry>OS/2</entry><entry> Nick Behnken used PE2LX to translate David Ross's Win32
            port to an OS/2 program. Check out Nick Behnken's page. </entry>
         </row>
         <row>
            <entry>OS/2</entry><entry> Craig Ballantyne ported bochs to OS/2. I will integrate this back
            into the main bochs source soon. Check out the guiSoft Corp.
            home page.
            </entry>
         </row>

         <row>
            <entry>Macintosh</entry><entry>David Batterham drbatter@socs.uts.edu.au or
            drbatter@yahoo.com ported bochs to the Mac. His changes are
            integrated, though it is work in progress. He compiled with CodeWarrior
            Pro R1 (CW12), and included a project file 'Bochs.proj' in the top-level
            directory of source code, which you may need to modify. I
            added a '--with-macos' option to configure, so you can use a Unix
            machine to generate header files for the Mac. Check out David's
            MacBochs website. David has not had time to maintain the page or the
            Mac port since early 2000. If you have Mac development tools and want
            to contribute, contact the developers list. </entry>
         </row>
         <row>
            <entry>FreeDOS for Bochs</entry><entry> David Batterham also offers information on running FreeDOS inside of bochs. You can download a disk image with a pre-installed copy of FreeDOS, a completely free DOS-like operating system. Check out his website at http://members.xoom.com/macbochs/freedos.html.
            For more info about FreeDOS, see FreeDOS Web page</entry>
         </row>
         </tbody>
         </tgroup>
      </table>
    <para>
    There's more! You can find more detailed testing information on the testing status page on bochs.sourceforge.net.
    </para>

   </section>

   <section><title>Licensing</title>
      <para>
       Bochs is released under the <ulink url="http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/lesser.html">GNU LGPL</ulink>,
       much thanks to <ulink url="http://www.linux-mandrake.com">MandrakeSoft</ulink>, makers
       of the Linux-Mandrake distribution.
      </para>
   </section
</chapter>

<!-- *************************************************************** -->
<chapter><title>Why do people use Bochs anyway?</title>
   <para>
      run more than one operating system without rebooting
   </para>
   <para>
         OS developers use Bochs to system software without endangering
        their development machine or rebooting.
   </para>
   <para>
      students use Bochs to learn about how PC hardware works
      hardware designers use bochs to help test new hardware
   </para>
</chapter>

<!-- *************************************************************** -->
<chapter><title>FAQ</title>
<qandaset>
  <qandaentry>
     <question>
       <para>Is Bochs Open Source?</para>
     </question>
     <answer>
       <para>
       Yes! Bochs is released under the <ulink url="http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/lesser.html">GNU LGPL</ulink>,
       much thanks to <ulink url="http://www.linux-mandrake.com">MandrakeSoft</ulink>, makers
       of the Linux-Mandrake distribution.
       </para>
     </answer>
  </qandaentry>
</qandaset>
</chapter>

<!-- *************************************************************** -->
<chapter><title>Installation</title>
<section><title>How to get it</title>
    <para>
       pointer to SF web site
most stable version: latest release. binaries and source available
latest version
  by using CVS software
  by downloading CVS snapshot
  </para>
</section>

<section><title>Installing a Binary</title>
    <section><title>Windows</title>
       <para>
       unzip into some directory.  Look for DOC-win32.html
  for more instructions.  Quick start: find dlxlinux/start.bat and
  double click
       </para>
   </section>
   <section><title>Unix</title>
     <para>
     <command>rpm -i bochs-&lt;VERSION>;.rpm</command>
     Look for <filename>/usr/local/bochs/latest/DOC-linux.html</filename>, man pages for
     bochs.  Quick start: <command>run bochs-dlx</command>  (in <filename>/usr/local/bin</filename>)
      </para>
   </section>
</section>

<section><title>Compiling from source</title>

  <section><title>Unix</title>
  <para>
  Run configure to make the Makefiles
  List of configure arguments
  Option of using .conf.* scripts
  What to report if configure fails: Tar up config.* and send to
    bochs-testing@tlw.com
  Make
  What to try if make fails: turn off configure options,
    look at SF bugs and patches section to see if it's a known
    problem, try to fix it yourself, if using CVS version try
    a release source file instead, fix it yourself
  Make install, what it installs and where
    /usr/local/bochs/$VERSION/*
    /usr/local/bin/bochs (and bximage)
    /usr/man/man1/bochs*.1 (and bximage.1)
    make install_dlx option
  How to build an RPM in Linux
  </para>
  </section>


  <section><title>Instructions for win32 VC++</title>
  <para>
  Getting the makefiles
    Download them from web site in a zip, install them on top
      of the source directory
    Run configure on a unix box, copy the Makefiles and config.h
      to your windows machine
    RUN CONFIGURE IN BOCHS!  This would be awesome.
    Cygwin?
  Building it with NMAKE
  Installation? Maybe download an existing windows binary package
    and drop in your new binary.  There is no make install, though
    this may be added some day.
    </para>
    </section>
<section><title>Instructions for cygwin?</title>
   <para>I have no idea.</para>
</section>
</section>
</chapter>

<chapter><title>Setup</title>
   <section><title>What does Bochs need?</title>
        <para>
        bochsrc, BIOS, VGABIOS, VGA font, disk images.
	table of bochsrc options and what they do
	BIOS/VGABIOS, what do they do?
	VGA font, how to install it
	disk images
	  where to find one pre-made
	  make a blank one with bximage
	  grab one from a real hard disk
          </para>
   </section>
</chapter>

<chapter><title>Using Bochs</title>
    <para>
      Resources for users
        bochs-developers mailing list, archive
	testing status page: tells what has been tried and who got it working
	SourceForge
	  look for bug reports
	  how to report problems, make feature requests
          </para>
</chapter>

<chapter><title>Common problems and what to do about them (Troubleshooting)</title>
    <para>
        What's a panic?  How to report it to bug tracker, how to make
	  it non-fatal.
        Mouse behavior, enabling and disabling
	Keyboard mapping problems
	[...]
    </para>
</chapter>

<chapter><title>Tips and Techniques</title>
    <para>
	Mount disk image in loopback
        Using two hard disks
	[...]
    </para>
</chapter>
<chapter><title>Guest operating systems</title>
	<section><title>Linux</title>
           <para>
	    What disk images are available.
	    Installing from scratch.
	    What works
	    Known problems
            </para>
          </section>
	  <section><title>OpenBSD</title>
             <para>
             </para>
          </section>
	  <section><title>FreeBSD</title>
             <para>
             </para>
          </section>
	  <section><title>FreeDOS</title>
             <para>
             </para>
          </section>
	  <section><title>DOS</title>
             <para>
             </para>
          </section>
	  <section><title>Windows *</title>
             <para>
             </para>
          </section>
	  <section><title>[...]</title>
             <para>
             </para>
          </section>
</chapter>





</book>