.\Document Author:  Timothy R. Butler   -   tbutler@uninetsolutions.com
.TH bochs 1 "The Bochs Project       bochs %VERSION%        2 Jun 2001"
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH NAME
bochs \- Portable x86 Emulator.
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH USAGE
.B bochs
[boot:c] [bochsrc syntax*]
.LP
*You can use  any of the syntax  from the bochrc configur
ation file as command line arguments see
.B bochsrc(1).
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
Bochs is a portable Intel Architecture  32 (x86) emulator
that runs on most popular  operating systems. Inside  the
emulator,  it  can  run  many operating systems including
Linux and Microsoft(R) Windows(R).
.\".\"DONT_SPLIT"
.SH OPTIONS
For   information    on    Bochs   command    line    and
configuration  file   arguments,   see   the   man   page
bochsrc(1).
.PP
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH LICENSE
This program  is distributed  under the terms of the  GNU
Lesser General Public License as published  by  the  Free
Software  Foundation.  See  the  COPYING file located  in
/usr/local/bochs/@VERSION@/ for details on the license and
the lack of warrantee.
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of this program can be found at:
        http://bochs.sourceforge.net/getcurrent.html
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH SEE ALSO
bochsrc(1), bochs-dlx(1), bximage(1)
.PP
.nf
The Bochs IA-32 Emulator site on the World Wide Web:
        http://bochs.sourceforge.net
.fi
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH AUTHORS
The   Bochs  emulator  was   created   by  Kevin   Lawton
(kevin@mandrakesoft.com),  and  is  currently  maintained
by the  members of  the  Bochs x86 Emulator Project . You
can see a current roster of members at:
            http://bochs.sourceforge.net/getinvolved.html
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH BUGS
Please  report all  bugs to the bug tracker  on  our  web
site. Just go to http://bochs.sourceforge.net , and click
"Bug Reports" on the sidebar under "Features."
.PP
Provide a detailed description of the bug, the version of
the program you are running, the operating system you are
running the program on  and  the  operating   system  you
are running in the emulator.

