.\"Document Author:  Volker Ruppert   -   vruppert@users.sourceforge.net"
.TH bxhub 1 "21 Feb 2025" "bxhub" "The Bochs Project"
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH NAME
bxhub \- Command line utility for the Bochs networking module 'socket'.
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bxhub
.RI \|[ options \|]
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
Bxhub is a utility required for the 'socket' networking module simulating an
ethernet hub for interconecting Bochs instances. It also simulates a server
providing the same services as the 'vnet' networking module (DHCP / DNS / FTP /
TFTP and ICMP-echo). All required parameters must be given in the command line.
.\".\"DONT_SPLIT"
.SH OPTIONS
.LP
If bxhub is started without command line options, these default values are used:

UDP base port 40000
.br
2 client connections
.br
Server MAC address b0:c4:20:00:00:0f
.br
FTP / TFTP support disabled
.br
.TP
The follow options can be used to change these settings:
.TP
.BI \-ports=...
Number of virtual ethernet ports (2 - 6)
.TP
.BI \-base=...
Base UDP port (bxhub uses 2 ports per Bochs session)
.TP
.BI \-mac=...
Host MAC address (default is b0:c4:20:00:00:0f)
.TP
.BI \-tftp=...
Enable FTP and TFTP support using specified directory as root
.TP
.BI \-bootfile=...
Network bootfile reported by DHCP - located on TFTP server
.TP
.BI \-loglev=...
Set log level (0 - 3, default 1)
.TP
.BI \-logfile=...
Send log output to file
.TP
.BI \--help
Display help message and exit
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH LICENSE
This program  is distributed  under the terms of the  GNU
Lesser General Public License as published  by  the  Free
Software  Foundation.  See the LICENSE and COPYING files located
in /usr/share/doc/bochs/ for details on the license and
the lack of warranty.
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of this program can be found at:
  https://bochs.sourceforge.io/getcurrent.html
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH SEE ALSO
bochs(1), bximage(1), bochsrc(5), bochs-dlx(1)
.PP
.nf
The Bochs IA-32 Emulator site on the World Wide Web:
  https://bochs.sourceforge.io

Online Bochs Documentation
	https://bochs.sourceforge.io/doc/docbook
.fi
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH AUTHORS
The original version of bxhub was written by Mariusz Matuszek in 2003 as a part
of the socket networking patch. The builtin server support comes from the 'vnet'
networking module and it has been adapted and extended by Volker Ruppert.
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH BUGS
Please report all bugs to the bug tracker  on  our  web
site. Just go to https://bochs.sourceforge.io, and click
"Bug Reports" on the sidebar under "Feedback."
.PP
Provide a detailed description of the bug, the version of
the program you are running, the operating system you are
running the program on  and  the  operating   system  you
are running in the emulator.

