.\"Document Author:  Timothy R. Butler   -   tbutler@uninetsolutions.com"
.TH bximage 1 "29 Dec 2005" "bximage" "The Bochs Project"
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH NAME
bximage \- Interactive Disk Image Creator for Bochs
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bximage
.RI \|[ options \|]
.RI \|[ filename \|]
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
Bximage  is an easy to use console based tool for creating
disk  images, particularly  for  use with  Bochs.  It   is
completely  interactive if no command  line arguments  are
used.  It can be switched to a non-interactive mode if all
required parameters are given in the command line.
.\".\"DONT_SPLIT"
.SH OPTIONS
.LP
When you run bximage without one of the following options,
it will  appear  in  interactive  mode and  ask   for  all
required parameters to create an image.
.TP
.BI \-fd
Create a floppy image.
.TP
.BI \-hd
Create a hard disk image.
.TP
.BI \-mode=...
Image mode (for hard disks only - see the
.I bochsrc
sample for supported options).
.TP
.BI \-size=...
Image size in megabytes (e.g. 1.44 for floppy image, 10
for hard disk image).
.TP
.BI \-q
Quiet  mode (don't prompt for user input). Without this
option bximage uses the  command  line parameters as
defaults for the interactive mode. If this option is
given and one of the required parameters is missing,
bximage will fall back to interactive mode.
.TP
.BI \--help
Print  a  summary  of  the command line options for
bximage and exit.
.LP
The
.I filename
parameter specifies the name of the image to be created.
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH LICENSE
This program  is distributed  under the terms of the  GNU
Lesser General Public License as published  by  the  Free
Software  Foundation.  See  the  COPYING file located  in
/usr/local/share/doc/bochs/ for details on the license and
the lack of warranty.
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of this program can be found at:
  http://bochs.sourceforge.net/getcurrent.html
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH SEE ALSO
bochs(1), bochsrc(5), bochs-dlx(1), bxcommit(1)
.PP
.nf
The Bochs IA-32 Emulator site on the World Wide Web:
  http://bochs.sourceforge.net

Online Bochs Documentation
	http://bochs.sourceforge.net/doc/docbook
.fi
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH AUTHORS
Bximage  was written  by Bryce Denney,  based on  several
similar tools from the bochs-developers list.
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH BUGS
Please  report all  bugs to the bug tracker  on  our  web
site. Just go to http://bochs.sourceforge.net, and click
"Bug Reports" on the sidebar under "Feedback."
.PP
Provide a detailed description of the bug, the version of
the program you are running, the operating system you are
running the program on  and  the  operating   system  you
are running in the emulator.

