<!--
================================================================
doc/docbook/user/user.dbk
$Id: user.dbk,v 1.2 2001-09-10 03:59:11 bdenney Exp $

This is the top level file for the Bochs Users Manual.
================================================================
-->

<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook V4.1//EN" >
<book>
<bookinfo>
   <title>Bochs User Manual</title>
   <authorgroup>
   <author><firstname>Kevin</firstname><surname>Lawton</surname></author>
   <author><firstname>Bryce</firstname><surname>Denney</surname></author>
   <editor><firstname>Michael</firstname><surname>Calabrese</surname></editor>
   </authorgroup>
</bookinfo>

<!-- *************************************************************** -->
<chapter><title>What is Bochs?</title>
   <section><title>I don't know whant to call this section...</title>
      <para>
      Bochs is a portable x86 PC emulation software package that emulates
      enough of the x86 CPU, related AT hardware, and BIOS to run DOS,
      Windows '95, Minix 2.0, and other OS's, all on your workstation.
      </para>

      <para>
      Bochs is an open source project distributed under the GNU Lesser General
      Public License. It was originally a commercial product, but in
      March 2000 MandrakeSoft bought Bochs and committed it to Open Source.
      Here is the press release.
      </para>

      <para>
      Bochs now compiles/runs on many platforms. See the following list for
      supported platforms and special notes:
      </para>

      <table><title>Supported platforms</title>
         <tgroup cols=2 align=left colsep=1 rowsep=1>
         <tbody>
         <row>
            <entry>Unix/X11</entry>
            <entry>This is my main development platform.</entry>
         </row>
         <row>
            <entry>BeOS</entry>
            <entry>I also did this port, originally to R3/PPC using CodeWarrior.
            It now works on R4/x86 with egcs. Simon Huet picked up
            maintaining/reworking the BeOS GUI port. Check out Simon's 
            BeBochs page.
            </entry>
         </row>

         <row>
            <entry>Win32</entry>
            <entry> This port was done by David Ross. I've enhanced
            the build process
            for Win32. You can compile with either the MS Visual C++ 5.0
            or GNU-Win32 environments. Go to Compiling Bochs on Win32 </entry>
         </row>

         <row>
            <entry>OS/2</entry>
            <entry> Nick Behnken used PE2LX to translate David Ross's Win32
            port to an OS/2 program. Check out Nick Behnken's page. 
            </entry>
         </row>
         <row>
            <entry>OS/2</entry>
            <entry> Craig Ballantyne ported bochs to OS/2. I will 
            integrate this back
            into the main bochs source soon. Check out the guiSoft Corp.
            home page.
            </entry>
         </row>

         <row>
            <entry>Macintosh</entry>
            <entry>David Batterham drbatter@socs.uts.edu.au or
            drbatter@yahoo.com ported bochs to the Mac. His changes are
            integrated, though it is work in progress. 
            He compiled with CodeWarrior
            Pro R1 (CW12), and included a project file 'Bochs.proj'
            in the top-level
            directory of source code, which you may need to modify. I
            added a '--with-macos' option to configure, so you can use a Unix
            machine to generate header files for the Mac. Check out David's
            MacBochs website. David has not had time to maintain the page or the
            Mac port since early 2000. If you have Mac 
            development tools and want
            to contribute, contact the developers list. </entry>
         </row>
         <row>
            <entry>FreeDOS for Bochs</entry>
            <entry> David Batterham also offers information on running FreeDOS inside of bochs. You can download a disk image with a pre-installed copy of FreeDOS, a completely free DOS-like operating system. Check out his website at http://members.xoom.com/macbochs/freedos.html.
            For more info about FreeDOS, see FreeDOS Web page</entry>
         </row>
         </tbody>
         </tgroup>
      </table>
      <para>
      There's more! You can find more detailed testing information on the testing status page on bochs.sourceforge.net.
      </para>

   </section>

   <section><title>Licensing</title>
      <para>
       Bochs is released under the <ulink url="http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/lesser.html">GNU LGPL</ulink>,
       much thanks to <ulink url="http://www.linux-mandrake.com">MandrakeSoft</ulink>, makers
       of the Linux-Mandrake distribution.
      </para>
   </section>
</chapter>

<!-- *************************************************************** -->
<chapter><title>Why do people use Bochs anyway?</title>
   <para>
      run more than one operating system without rebooting
   </para>
   <para>
         OS developers use Bochs to system software without endangering
        their development machine or rebooting.
   </para>
   <para>
      students use Bochs to learn about how PC hardware works
      hardware designers use bochs to help test new hardware
   </para>
</chapter>

<!-- *************************************************************** -->
<chapter><title>FAQ</title>
<qandaset>
  <qandaentry>
     <question>
       <para>Is Bochs Open Source?</para>
     </question>
     <answer>
       <para>
       Yes! Bochs is released under the <ulink url="http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/lesser.html">GNU LGPL</ulink>,
       much thanks to <ulink url="http://www.linux-mandrake.com">MandrakeSoft</ulink>, makers
       of the Linux-Mandrake distribution.
       </para>
     </answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question>
       <para>How do you pronounce "bochs"?</para>
     </question>
     <answer>
       <para>
       Phonetically the same as the English word "box". It's just a play on the word "box", since techies like to call their machines a "Linux box", "Windows box", ... Bochs emulates a box inside a box. 
       </para>
     </answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question>
       <para>Who is the author of bochs?</para>
     </question>
     <answer>
       <para>
       Kevin Lawton is the primary author of bochs. There have been bug fixes, enhancements, and code contributions from some few hundred people, so it is not possible to list them all. Kevin is presently working on a PC virtualization project called <ulink url="http://www.plex86.org">plex86</ulink> and no longer maintain bochs.
       </para>
     </answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question><para>
     Who maintains bochs now?
     </para></question>
     <answer><para>
      With Kevin's help, in April 2001, the members of the bochs-developers mailing list set up a new official bochs site hosted by <ulink url="http://sourcefourge.net">Source Forge</ulink>. The current admins on this project are Bryce Denney and Greg Alexander.
     </para></answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question><para>
     Tell me about peformance when running bochs?
     </para></question>
     <answer><para>
     Because Bochs emulates every x86 instruction and all the devices in a PC system, it does not reach high emulation speeds. Kevin reported approximately 1.5MIPS using bochs on a 400Mhz PII Linux machine. Users who have an x86 processor and want the highest emulation speeds may want to consider PC virtualization sotware uch as plex86 (free) or vmware (commercial). 
     </para></answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question><para>
     Does bochs use a disk partition to install the OS? 
     </para></question>
     <answer><para>
     No. You use a disk image file, which is simply a large file, like any other file, on your platform's disk. 
     </para></answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question><para>
     Why can't I use Bochs with my current Win95 installation? 
     </para></question>
     <answer><para>
     Think about this. If you had two different PC's, they would require different hardware drivers. So you may not be able to safely move a disk drive with Win95 on it, from one to the other. Bochs is no different. It emulates a certain set of hardware devices, and requires each OS be configured for those devices. 
     </para></answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question><para>
     Is there a developer's email list for bochs?
     </para></question>
     <answer><para>
     Yes.  For instructions on joining, go to
     <ulink url="developers.html">Developers email-list.</ulink>
     </para></answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question><para>
     Is there an irc channel for bochs?
     </para></question>
     <answer><para>
     Not that I am aware of.
     </para></answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question><para>
     Do you know of any snapshots of Bochs running Win95?
     </para></question>
     <answer><para>
     Yes!  Look for "screen shots" on the <ulink url="http://bochs.sourceforge.net">Bochs home page</ulink> or on other Bochs sites.
     </para></answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question><para>
     Does bochs support a CDROM?
     </para></question>
     <answer><para>
     Yes, a CDROM is supported in Linux, Windows, and OpenBSD.  The
CDROM drivers for bochs allow the guest operating system to access the
host operating system's CDROM data directly.
     </para></answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question><para>
     Does bochs support a sound device?
     </para></question>
     <answer><para>
     Yes, there is Sound Blaster emulation support for Windows and Linux.
     </para></answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question><para>
     Does bochs support a network card?
     </para></question>
     <answer><para>
     Supposedly yes.  There is emulation for an NE2000 NIC in the current
releases, though I have not heard whether it works or not.  If you try it,
please fill out a testing form or bug report.
     </para></answer>
  </qandaentry>

  <qandaentry>
     <question><para>
     What applications are known to run inside of bochs?
     </para></question>
     <answer><para>
     Well, lot's of different OS's run inside of bochs, so
   thousands.  I'm assuming your asking about Windows programs.
   To give you a few, the following ones from the Winstone'98 tests
   worked:
   </para>
   <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
      <para>Access 97</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
      <para>CorelDRAW! 7</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
      <para>Excel 97</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
      <para>Lotus 1-2-3 97</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
      <para>Word 97</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
      <para>PowerPoint 97</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
      <para>Quattro Pro 7</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
      <para>WordPerfect 7</para>
      </listitem>
   </itemizedlist>

     <para>Also, I've compiled an entire OS kernel inside bochs before.  Not
to mention, running DOOM, though at then-pathetic speeds.
     </para></answer>
  </qandaentry>

<!-- ......................................................
     A blank question to fill in copy and paste to create
     a new entry (8 lines to yank)
     ......................................................
  <qandaentry>
     <question><para>
     Question is put here
     </para></question>
     <answer><para>
       Answer is put here. 
     </para></answer>
  </qandaentry>
-->

</qandaset>
</chapter>

<!-- *************************************************************** -->
<chapter><title>Installation</title>
<section><title>How to get it</title>
    <para>
    You can get the soruce code for Bochs from the Bochs' home page at bochs.SourceForge.net.  From here you can get hold of the latest stable source along with binaries for unix and windows.  You can also use CVS software to obtain the a snapshot of the development version.
    </para>
    <para>
       pointer to SF web site
  </para>
    <para>

    </para>
</section>

<section><title>Installing a Binary</title>
    <section><title>Windows</title>
       <para>
       unzip into some directory.  Look for DOC-win32.html
  for more instructions.  Quick start: find dlxlinux/start.bat and
  double click
       </para>
   </section>
   <section><title>Unix</title>
     <para>
     <command>rpm -i bochs-&lt;VERSION>;.rpm</command>
     Look for <filename>/usr/local/bochs/latest/DOC-linux.html</filename>, man pages for
     bochs.  Quick start: <command>run bochs-dlx</command>  (in <filename>/usr/local/bin</filename>)
      </para>
   </section>
</section>

<section><title>Compiling from source</title>

  <section><title>Unix</title>
  <para>
  All releases are gzip'd tar files. That means the whole Bochs source code directory has been consolidated into one file using the Unix command 'tar', then compressed to save space with GNU 'gzip'. To extract the source code, you'll need both 'tar' and 'gzip/gunzip'. All files are contained within one subdirectory named 'bochs-YYMMDDv'. 
  <screen>
  <userinput>
    cd /path/parent-directory
    gzip -dc bochs-YYMMDDv.tar.gz | tar -xvf -
    cd bochs-YYMMDDv
  </userinput>
  </screen>
  </para>
  <para>
  Run configure to make the Makefiles
  List of configure arguments
  Option of using .conf.* scripts
  What to report if configure fails: Tar up config.* and send to
    bochs-testing@tlw.com
  Make
  What to try if make fails: turn off configure options,
    look at SF bugs and patches section to see if it's a known
    problem, try to fix it yourself, if using CVS version try
    a release source file instead, fix it yourself
  Make install, what it installs and where
    /usr/local/bochs/$VERSION/*
    /usr/local/bin/bochs (and bximage)
    /usr/man/man1/bochs*.1 (and bximage.1)
    make install_dlx option
  How to build an RPM in Linux
  </para>
  </section>


  <section><title>Instructions for win32 VC++</title>
  <para>
  Getting the makefiles
    Download them from web site in a zip, install them on top
      of the source directory
    Run configure on a unix box, copy the Makefiles and config.h
      to your windows machine
    RUN CONFIGURE IN BOCHS!  This would be awesome.
    Cygwin?
  Building it with NMAKE
  Installation? Maybe download an existing windows binary package
    and drop in your new binary.  There is no make install, though
    this may be added some day.
    </para>
    </section>
<section><title>Instructions for cygwin?</title>
   <para>I have no idea.</para>
</section>
</section>
</chapter>

<chapter><title>Setup</title>
   <section><title>What does Bochs need?</title>
        <para>
        bochsrc, BIOS, VGABIOS, VGA font, disk images.
	table of bochsrc options and what they do
	BIOS/VGABIOS, what do they do?
	VGA font, how to install it
	disk images
	  where to find one pre-made
	  make a blank one with bximage
	  grab one from a real hard disk
          </para>
   </section>
</chapter>

<chapter><title>Using Bochs</title>
    <para>
      Resources for users
        bochs-developers mailing list, archive
	testing status page: tells what has been tried and who got it working
	SourceForge
	  look for bug reports
	  how to report problems, make feature requests
          </para>
</chapter>

<chapter><title>Common problems and what to do about them (Troubleshooting)</title>
    <para>
        What's a panic?  How to report it to bug tracker, how to make
	  it non-fatal.
        Mouse behavior, enabling and disabling
	Keyboard mapping problems
	[...]
    </para>
</chapter>

<chapter><title>Tips and Techniques</title>
    <para>
	Mount disk image in loopback
        Using two hard disks
	[...]
    </para>
</chapter>
<chapter><title>Guest operating systems</title>
	<section><title>Linux</title>
           <para>
	    What disk images are available.
	    Installing from scratch.
	    What works
	    Known problems
            </para>
          </section>
	  <section><title>OpenBSD</title>
             <para>
             </para>
          </section>
	  <section><title>FreeBSD</title>
             <para>
             </para>
          </section>
	  <section><title>FreeDOS</title>
             <para>
             </para>
          </section>
	  <section><title>DOS</title>
             <para>
             </para>
          </section>
	  <section><title>Windows *</title>
             <para>
             </para>
          </section>
	  <section><title>[...]</title>
             <para>
             </para>
          </section>
</chapter>


</book>
