<!--
================================================================
doc/docbook/documentation/documentation.dbk
$Id: documentation.dbk,v 1.6 2001-09-20 03:27:24 bdenney Exp $

This is the top level file for the Bochs Documentation Manual.
================================================================
-->

<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook V4.1//EN" [

<!-- include definitions that are common to all bochs documentation -->
<!ENTITY % bochsdefs SYSTEM "../include/defs.sgm">
%bochsdefs;

]>

<book>
<bookinfo>
   <title>Bochs Documentation Manual</title>
   <authorgroup>
   <author><firstname>Michael</firstname><surname>Calabrese</surname></author>
   <author><firstname>Bryce</firstname><surname>Denney</surname></author>
   </authorgroup>
</bookinfo>
<chapter><title>Layout of Bochs Documentation</title>

<para>
The Bochs documentation is divided into three major divisions:
<itemizedlist>
  <listitem>
    <para>
    The User's Guide introduces the Bochs Emulator, and covers installation and use.
    </para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para>
    Developer's Guide: Describes the internals of the Bochs Emulator for developers.
    </para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para>
    Documentation Guide: Describes how the documentation is organized, and how to render it, and how to add to it.  This section is in the documentation guide.
    </para>
  </listitem>
</itemizedlist>   
   </para>

<para>
In docbook terminology, each of the three divisions is a book.  Inside each
book are a series of chapters.  A chapter may be divided into sections, and
each section is divided into more sections.  Eventually we will add fancy
things like a table of contents, index, and glossary, when we learn how.
</para>

</chapter>

<chapter><title>Docbook Basics</title>
<para>
Some of the most commonly used docbook patterns are described here
for quick reference.  For all the details (sometimes more than you
wanted), try &docbookTDG; by Norman Walsh and Leonard Muellner, which O'Reilly
&amp; Associates has generously placed on their web site.  In this section,
many of the SGML tags are linked to the page of Walsh's book that describes
that tag in detail.
</para>

<section><title>Small Tutorial</title>

<para>
Docbook files are text files containing SGML.  If you have ever looked
at HTML, then a docbook file will look familiar.  Not the same, but familiar.
The easiest way of getting familiar with the docbook format is by looking at
examples such as the Bochs documentation itself.  When you compare the source
code to the rendered documentation on the web site, it will be pretty obvious
what all the codes are doing.  HTML is very forgiving about breaking the syntax
rules, such as not putting &lt;/h1&gt; at then end of an &lt;h1&gt; section.
SGML is picky; if you forget that kind of thing in SGML, it will insist that
you fix it.  
</para>

<para>
Every paragraph must begin with the &lt;para&gt; tag and end with the
corresponding end tag, &lt;/para&gt;.
<programlisting>
&lt;<ulink url="http://www.docbook.org/tdg/en/html/para.html">para</ulink>&gt;
This is a paragram
&lt;/para&gt;
</programlisting>
</para>

<para>
A chapter looks like this:
<programlisting>
&lt;<ulink url="http://www.docbook.org/tdg/en/html/chapter.html">chapter</ulink>&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;<replaceable>title of the chapter</replaceable>&lt;/title&gt;
  <replaceable>text of the chapter</replaceable>
&lt;/chapter&gt;
</programlisting>
The text of the chapter must contain at least one complete &lt;para&gt; tag,
and it can include &lt;section&gt;s.
</para>

<para>
A section looks like this:
<programlisting>
&lt;<ulink url="http://www.docbook.org/tdg/en/html/section.html">section</ulink>&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;<replaceable>title of the section</replaceable>&lt;/title&gt;
  <replaceable>text of the section</replaceable>
&lt;/section&gt;
</programlisting>
The text of the section must contain at least one complete &lt;para&gt; tag,
and it can include other &lt;section&gt;s.
</para>

<para>
To make a link to any URL, use the syntax:
<programlisting>
&lt;<ulink url="http://www.docbook.org/tdg/en/html/ulink.html">ulink</ulink> url="<replaceable>URL</replaceable>"&gt;<replaceable>text of the hyperlink</replaceable>&lt;/ulink&gt;
</programlisting>
</para>

<para>
To include a picture in the text, use the &lt;graphic&gt; tag.  In SGML, this
graphic tag has no closing tag.
<programlisting>
&lt;<ulink url="http://www.docbook.org/tdg/en/html/graphic.html">graphic</ulink> format="<replaceable>fmt</replaceable>" fileref="<replaceable>filename</replaceable>"&gt;
</programlisting>
The <replaceable>fmt</replaceable> can be one of many formats including GIF,
JPG, PNG, PS, and EPS.  The filename should be on the local disk.  If there is
a pathname, it should be relative to the source file or it won't be found on
anyone's system other than yours.
</para>

<para>
There are over 300 tags defined in the latest version of docbook, so 
we won't try to list them all here.  Once you get the idea, you can 
either find examples in the rest of the documentation that do what you
need, or look at Walsh and Muellner's
<ulink url="http://www.docbook.org/tdg/en/html/docbook.html">DocBook: The Definitive Guide</ulink>
for more details.
</para>

</section>   <!-- end of Docbook Basics:Small Tutorial section -->

<section><title>References and Other Tutorials</title>

<para>
Docbook was created more than 10 years ago, but since 1999, Docbook has been 
under the guidance of the DocBook Technical Committee at OASIS.  The 
<ulink url="http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/docbook">OASIS website</ulink>
distributes the official DocBook DTDs, and has pages on Docbook history,
samples, tools, and runs a few docbook mailing lists.
</para>

<para>
Since the Linux Documentation Project uses docbook, they have written some
good tutorial material.  In particular the <ulink url="http://www.linuxdoc.org/LDP/LDP-Author-Guide/index.html">LDP Author Guide</ulink>, by Jorge Godoy
is very good.
</para>

<para>
O'Reilly &amp; Associates publishes a book called <ulink
url="http://www.docbook.org/tdg/en/html/docbook.html">DocBook: The Definitive
Guide</ulink> by Norman Walsh and Leonard Muellner.  You can buy it or read it
online.  Norman Walsh knows what he's talking about, since he is the chair of
the DocBook Technical Committee.  This is good for reference, since it has a
complete list of tags and their grammar.
</para>

<para>
<ulink url="http://www.ibiblio.org/godoy/sgml/docbook/howto/index.html">DocBook
HOWTO, also by Jorge Godoy</ulink>
</para>

<para>
An article on lwn.net called <ulink
url="http://lwn.net/2000/features/DocBook">Exploring SGML Docbook</ulink>
focuses mostly on installation of tools from scratch: openjade, Norman Walsh's
DSSSL stylesheets, and jade2tex.  If you can get the tools from RPMs or 
whatever package your OS uses, use that instead.
</para>

</section>  <!-- end of Docbook Basics:References and Other Tutorials -->

</chapter>

<chapter><title>Conventions</title>
<para>
Put a &amp;FIXME; near things that need to be fixed up.  A &amp;FIXME; causes
the under construction symbol to appear, like this &FIXME;.
</para>
<para>
&FIXME; SGML docbook...lower case elements...indentation...remarks...master document/include files
</para>
</chapter>

<chapter><title>Rendering</title>

<para>
The docbook source code is a text file that can be edited with any text editor
such as emacs or vi.  Several software tools are required to render this
source code into a nice readable form, such as HTML, PDF, or PostScript.
This section describes the tools you need and the steps you take to render
the Bochs documentation.
</para>

<tip>
<para>
If you just want to read the documentation, you should not
need to read and understand this section, and render the docs yourself.  The
&bochswebsite; has all this information in readable form already.
</para>
</tip>

<sect1>
<title>Jade and DSSSL</title>
<para>
Here is what the Linux Documentation Project says about jade:

  <blockquote>
  <attribution>
  LDP author's guide
  </attribution>
  <para>
  Jade is the front-end processor for SGML and XML. It uses the DSSSL and
  DocBook DTD to perform the verification and rendering from SGML and XML into
  the target format.
  </para>
  </blockquote>
</para>

<para>
What does all this mean?
For purpose of Bochs documentation, jade reads the docbook source file and
writes out a HTML/PDF/PS file.  Bochs documentation is in SGML format, though
apparantly jade can handle XML Docbooks as well.  DSSSL stands for 
<quote>Document Style Semantics and Specification Language</quote>, and it
tells jade how to translate the docbook tags into the target format.  DSSSL
files are written in the Scheme programming language, which is a variant of
LISP.  Learn more about DSSSL at <ulink
url="http://www.jclark.com/dsssl">Jim Clark's DSSSL page</ulink>.
The DocBook DTD is the formal description of what elements and attributes can
be used in a docbook.
</para>

<sect2>
<title>Installation</title>

<para>
The easiest way to get jade working in Linux is to install packages.  The
recent RedHat, Suse, and Mandrake Linux distributions all include
include openjade and SGML tools.  If you can get the right packages installed,
you may save yourself a few hours of compiling and configuring from scratch.
For plex86, which also uses docbook, Kevin Lawton listed the packages that
he installed on Mandrake to get jade working:

<programlisting>
  jadetex-3.5-2mdk
  openjade-1.3-10mdk
  docbook-dtd31-sgml-1.0-3mdk
  docbook-utils-0.6-1mdk
  docbook-style-dsssl-1.62-4mdk
  docbook-dtd412-xml-1.0-3mdk
  sgml-common-0.2-4mdk
  xml-common-0.1-3mdk
</programlisting>

Hopefully, the required packages on other Linux distributions have
similar names.  If you have jade working, please tell a documentation
writer the package names that you used so that we can include it in the docs.
&NEEDHELP;
</para>

<para>
If you cannot get jade to work using packages, you need to find and install
three things: the DocBook DTD version 4.1 from &OASIS;, the program 
<ulink url="http://www.jclark.com/jade/">jade</ulink> 
(or <ulink url="http://openjade.sourceforge.net/">openjade</ulink>), and the
<ulink url="http://sourceforge.net/projects/docbook/">Docbook DSSSL
stylesheets</ulink> for the formats that you want to render to.  The whole
process is described in &docbookTDG; in Appendix III section A.  If you want
to render to PostScript or Adobe PDF, you also need to install TeX and
and some associated tools.  It is a nontrivial process.
</para>
<tip> <para> Just use the packages.  </para> </tip>

<para>
For now, building the Bochs documentation also depends on some scripts called
docbook2html, docbook2pdf, and docbook2ps.  These come from the docbook-tools
project at <ulink url="http://sources.redhat.com/docbook-tools">http://sources.redhat.com/docbook-tools</ulink>.
</para>

</sect2>

<sect2>
<title>Using jade with docbook2x scripts</title>

<para>
Check to see if you have the docbook2ps, docbook2pdf, and docbook2html
scripts.  If so, you can probably use the Bochs Makefile.  Just do
<programlisting>
  cd $BOCHS/doc/docbook
  make
</programlisting>
It should render three docbook books, one in user, one in development, and one
in and documentation.  If there are no errors, look for the user guide
in <filename>$BOCHS/doc/docbook/user/user.pdf</filename>,
<filename>$BOCHS/doc/docbook/users/user.ps</filename>, and
<filename>$BOCHS/doc/docbook/users/book1.html</filename>.  The HTML is broken
into lots of little chunks that link to each other, but book1.html is the first
one.
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2>
<title>Using jade directly</title>
<para>
If you don't have docbook2<replaceable>format</replaceable> scripts, you
can also run jade manually.  The command is long, so you may want to make 
your own script or edit your copy of the makefile.  These commands assume that
you installed Norman Walsh's DSSSL stylesheets in <varname>$DSSSL</varname>.
To render the user's guide into HTML, type:
<programlisting>
  cd $BOCHS/doc/docbook/user
  jade -t sgml -d <varname>$DSSSL</varname>/html/docbook.dsl user.dbk
</programlisting>
Or, if you want to render the developer's guide into TeX format,
<programlisting>
  cd $BOCHS/doc/docbook/developer
  jade -t tex -d <varname>$DSSSL</varname>/print/docbook.dsl developer.dbk
</programlisting>
Or, if you want to render the documentation guide into Rich Text Format,
<programlisting>
  cd $BOCHS/doc/docbook/documentation
  jade -t rtf -d <varname>$DSSSL</varname>/print/docbook.dsl documentation.dbk
</programlisting>
I believe that the HTML stylesheet must have "-t sgml" but the print
stylesheet in the second example can have "-t rtf" for Rich Text Format,
"-t tex" for TeX, or "-t mif" for MIF.
</para>

<para>
Bochs has the convention of calling the docbook files
<replaceable>name</replaceable>.dbk, but any file name would work.  Some
other people call them <replaceable>NAME</replaceable>.sgm for SGML.
</para>

</sect2>
</sect1>

<sect1> <title>Nsgmls</title>

<para>
The Bochs documentation is written in SGML docbook style, so any tool which can
check SGML syntax can be used to check the docbook.  The DTD (data type
description) for docbook tells exactly which elements can be used and where.
It says which attributes are required and which are optional, and how elements
should be nested.  The term "validate" has a specific meaning in SGML.  When
you validate a SGML document, it means that you read the DTD and then check
that the document conforms to all the rules of the DTD.
</para>

<para>
A program called nsgmls, written by James Clark <email>jjc@jclark.com</email>,
can validate an SGML document such as our docbook.  Although nsgmls can do many
other things, this command will validate the docbook against the DTD which
defines the syntax: 
<cmdsynopsis>
  <command>nsgmls</command>
  <arg choice="plain">-s</arg>
  <arg choice="plain"><replaceable>filename</replaceable></arg>
</cmdsynopsis>
</para>

<para>
Nsgmls is part of SP, a "free object-oriented toolkit for SGML parsing and
entity management" by James Clark <email>jjc@jclark.com</email>.  SP can be
found at 
<ulink url="http://www.jclark.com/sp">http://www.jclark.com/sp</ulink>.
There is a complete man page for nsgmls 
<ulink url="http://www.jclark.com/sp/nsgmls.htm">here</ulink>.
</para>

</sect1>

</chapter>   <!-- end Rendering chapter -->

</book>
